here are some tips on how to prevent fire: 
Fire Protection and Prevention 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requires 
employers to implement fire protection and prevention programs in the 
workplace. The regulations that apply to fire protection and prevention can 
be found mainly in Subpart F of the construction standards, though the 
requirement for a fire prevention program is first set out in Subpart C. The 
following sections of the construction standards contain requirements for fire 
protection that are of significance to roofing contractors: 
1926.24 Subpart C, Fire protection and prevention programs 
1926.150 Fire protection 
1926.151 Fire prevention 
1926.152 Flammable and combustible liquids 
1926.153 Liquefied petroleum gas (LP-Gas) 
1926.154 Temporary heating devices 
1926.155 Definitions 
1926.550 Subpart N, Cranes and derricks  
Following this chapter, there is a list of fire safety work practices addressing 
many fire hazards found in the roofing workplace, including field operations 
and shop activities. Contractors should review the elements of the list most 
applicable to their companies’ operations and consider including them in 
their companies’ health and safety program. 
Fire Protection 
Fire is a chemical reaction that requires three elements to be present for the 
reaction to take place and continue. The three elements are: 
 Heat, or an ignition source 
 Fuel  
 Oxygen 
These three elements typically are referred to as the “fire triangle.” Fire is the 
result of the reaction between the fuel and oxygen in the air. Scientists 
developed the concept of a fire triangle to aid in understanding of the cause 
of fires and how they can be prevented and extinguished. Heat, fuel and 
oxygen must combine in a precise way for a fire to start and continue to 
burn. If one element of the fire triangle is not present or removed, fire will not 
start or, if already burning, will extinguish. 
Ignition sources can include any material, equipment or operation that emits 
a spark or flame—including obvious items, such as torches, as well as less 
obvious items, such as static electricity and grinding operations. Equipment 
or components that radiate heat, such as kettles, catalytic converters and 
mufflers, also can be ignition sources. 
Fuel sources include combustible materials, such as wood, paper, trash and 
clothing; flammable liquids, such as gasoline or solvents; and flammable 
gases, such as propane or natural gas. 
Oxygen in the fire triangle comes from the air in the atmosphere. Air 
contains approximately 79 percent nitrogen and 21 percent oxygen. OSHA 
describes a hazardous atmosphere as one which is oxygen-deficient 
because it has less than 19.5 percent oxygen, or oxygen enriched because it 
has greater than 23.5 percent oxygen. Either instance is regarded by OSHA 
as an atmosphere immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) for 
reasons unrelated to the presence of fire. Depending on the type of fuel 
involved, fires can occur with much lower volume of oxygen present than 
needed to support human respiration. 
Every roofing project has all three of the fire triangle elements present in 
abundance. The key to preventing fires is to keep heat and ignition sources 
away from materials, equipment and structures that could act as fuel to 
complete the fire triangle. 
Fire Classifications 
Fires are classified as A, B, C, D or K based on the type of substance that is 
the fuel for the fire, as follows: 
Class A—fires involving ordinary combustibles, such as paper, trash, 
some plastics, wood and cloth. A rule of thumb is if it leaves an ash 
behind, it is a Class A fire.  
Class B—fires involving flammable gases or liquids, such as propane, oil 
and gasoline 
Class C—fires involving energized electrical components 
Class D—fires involving metal. A rule of thumb is if the name of the metal 
ends with the letters “um,” it is a Class D fire. Examples of this are 
aluminum, magnesium, beryllium and sodium. Class D fires rarely occur in 
the roofing industry. 
Class K—fires involving vegetable or animal cooking oils or fats; common 
in commercial cooking operations using deep fat fryers 
Fire Extinguishers 
There are different types of fire extinguishers designed to put out the 
different classes of fire. Selecting the appropriate fire extinguisher is an 
 
important consideration for a roofing contractor. The wrong extinguisher 
actually may make a fire emergency worse. For example, failing to use a C
rated extinguisher on energized electrical components may endanger 
workers by causing the extinguishing material to be electrified by the 
energized components that are on fire. C-rated fire extinguishers put out the 
fire by using a chemical that does not conduct electricity.